=== Page 1 ===
Resumos SBBq
Using Content Analysis To Evaluate The Impact of Technological Development In
Instructional Materials
 
Keiler, G.P.; Galembeck, E.
Departamento de Bioquímica, IB, Unicamp, SP, Brasil.
Textbooks are widely used as a teaching tool, and are considered very important in several
educational environments, from elementary to tertiary education levels. Since the first
textbook arose in the seventeenth century, printed books are the most popular format of
textbooks published. New technologies developed over years such as paper, ink and
printing hardware. These have made it possible to present printed books in even more
attractive formats. Moreover, digital technologies allowed textbooks to provide
complementary content, such as software, audio and video. Aiming to understand how
new technologies has impacted both textbook presentation and content, we run an
external representations (ER) content analysis in a textbook chapter and on an
educational software (eBook), both about muscle contraction. The three editions of
Bioquímica Básica textbook (1990, 1999 and 2007), written by Anita Marzzoco and
Bayardo B. Torres and the four versions of Contração Muscular software developed by
Eduardo Galembeck et al. were analyzed. The obtained results showed that the textbook
had changes in relation to typography (paper size, kind of paper and colors of printing),
and to ERs presented (use of electronic micrograph and 3D models in the 3rd edition and
the exclusion of some images and graphs previously used). Regarding the Contração
Muscular software, there were several changes in relation to the visual aspect, such as
images and icons, and also code updates to make the software compatible with new
technologies developed since the first version was released. Although technology has
driven some updates in both cases, this happened in different aspects including
possibilities to create a modern layout and cheaper printer services, in the case of the
textbook, and graphic design and software usability, in the case of the eBook. Thus
changing the way information is presented to the users.
Keyword: Biochemistry eBook, Biochemistry textbook, muscle contraction
Revista de Ensino de Bioquímica – V12.N.1/ 2014    ISSN: 2318-8790
89
